# Syngestures: Linux Multi-Touch Protocol Userland Daemon

syngestures is a utility providing multi-gesture support for various Linux touchpad/trackpad drivers
implementing the [Linux Multi-Touch
Protocol](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/input/multi-touch-protocol.txt), such as
`xf86-input-synaptics`. [Read more about syngesture, the impetus for its development, and how it
fits into the X11/Wayland evdev/libinput ecosystem in the release
announcement](http://neosmart.net/blog/2020/multi-touch-gestures-on-linux/)

## Purpose and Design

syngestures is a daemon (background application) that listens for input events generated by your
touchpad or trackpad and detects when multi-touch gestures are performed. It can be configured
(globally or on a per-user level) to carry out user-defined actions when specific gestures are
recognized (with support for unique configurations per-device if you have multiple touchpads
installed).

It may be used alone or, more commonly, in conjunction with desktop environment/display server
integration/driver - we recommend using it with `xf86-input-synaptics` under X11 for the most
responsive and "natural" cursor movement and acceleration.

## Dependencies

Pre-built syngesture binaries are statically compiled and have no runtime dependencies. Building
syngestures from source normally creates a dependency on `libevdev`, which should already be
installed if you're on any modern Linux distribution.

### Security Considerations

Depending on your system configuration, you may need to either add a udev rule or make sure your
user account is a member of a particular group in order to use `syngestures` without root privileges
\- see the "Troubleshooting" section below for details. **It is not recommended to run syngestures as
root or under `sudo` since syngestures allows running arbitrary commands in response to touch
gestures.**

Refer to the troubleshooting section below for more information.

## Installation

Packages containing pre-built binaries for various systems are available for tagged syngestures
releases and can be obtained from GitHub (see the sidebar on the right).

syngestures is written in rust and requires a working copy of the rust toolchain and a functional C
compiler in order to build from source. It can be compiled and installed by checking out a copy of
the source code and building with `cargo`, the rust package manager:

```
git clone https://github.com/mqudsi/syngesture.git
cd syngesture
cargo install --path .
```

alternatively, it may be downloaded, built, and installed directly via cargo:

```
cargo install syngestures
```

To build a version that logs events to the terminal for debugging (required for filing any issues on
GitHub), you will need to use `cargo install syngestures --features logging` (or if you've cloned
the git repo, `cd` into the directory and use `cargo install --path . --features logging` instead).

## Configuration

syngesture is configured via one or more TOML configuration files, a sample file [is included in
this repository](./syngestures.toml). Configuration files may be installed at a machine level to
`/usr/local/etc/syngestures.toml` or with multiple per-device configuration files installed to
`/usr/local/etc/syngestures.d/*.toml`, or at a user level with a configuration file at
`$HOME/.config/syngestures.toml` or multiple per-device configuration files installed to
`$HOME/.config/syngestures.d/*.toml`. Multiple files are supported and concatenated, with user
configuration files for the same input device overriding system configuration files w/ the same
path.

Note that if you are running `syngestures` as a system service or as root, you can only use the
global configuration paths (not the ones starting with `$HOME`).

The basic format of the configuration file is as follows, with a `[[device]]` node per input device
implementing the MT protocol:

```toml
[[device]]
device = "/dev/input/by-path/pci-0000:00:15.0-platform-i2c_designware.0-event-mouse"
gestures = [
	# Navigate next
	{ type = "swipe", direction = "right", fingers = 3, execute = "xdotool key alt+Right" },
	# Navigate previous
	{ type = "swipe", direction = "left", fingers = 3, execute = "xdotool key alt+Left" },
	# Next desktop/workspace
	{ type = "swipe", direction = "right", fingers = 4, execute = "xdotool key Super_L+Right" },
	# Previous desktop/workspace
	{ type = "swipe", direction = "left", fingers = 4, execute = "xdotool key Super_L+Left" },
]
```

The value of `device` should be a stable path to your touchpad, it can often be found by looking at
the output of `dmesg`. Wayland users may substitute the usage of `xdotool` for whatever alternative
supports their display server/compositor/window manager.

The value of each gesture's `type` may be either `swipe` or `tap`; a numeric `fingers` parameter
from `1` to `5` is required in both cases, but an additional `direction` (being one of `right`,
`left`, `up`, or `down`) is required in case of `swipe`.

## Troubleshooting

If you get an error like the following when using syngestures (the path to the device depends on the
path you've set up in `syngestures.toml`):

> /dev/input/by-path/pci-0000:00:15.0-platform-i2c_designware.0-event-mouse: Permission denied (os error 13)

then your account does not have sufficient privileges to open the input device and listen for
events. Running `syngestures` as root (`sudo syngestures`) avoids this error but is not a
recommended solution as `syngestures` can run arbitrary commands in response to gestures, and you
certainly don't want those to run with root privileges.

Typically working around this correctly is as easy as adding your account to the `input` group and
rebooting, but we can find out for sure by figuring out which group owns the input device (the
touchpad).

Start by using `realpath` against the path of the device in your `syngestures.toml` or from the
error message, e.g. from the error message above:

```sh
$ realpath /dev/input/by-path/pci-0000:00:15.0-platform-i2c_designware.0-event-mouse
/dev/input/event4
```

As you can see from the output, in this case our `/dev/input/by-path/...` device is actually a
symlink to another device, so `/dev/input/event4` is the actual path we need to check ownership for.
We'll use `ls -al` to find out who actually owns it:

```sh
$ ls -al /dev/input/event4
crw-rw---- 1 root input 13, 68 Feb 11 16:16 /dev/input/event4
```

(You can do this in one go with `ls -al $(realpath <original path>)` instead, if you prefer.)

Here the third column is the owning user (`root`) and the fourth column is the owning group
(`input`) - what we were looking for. We need to add our account to this group to give us permission
to open the input device and listen for gestures, replacing `input` in the code below with the
owning group from your `ls -al` output if it's something different:

```sh
$ sudo usermod -aG input $(whoami)
```

**You must reboot before this change will take effect.** You can then try running `syngestures`
again and see what happens.

## License

syngestures is developed and maintained by Mahmoud Al-Qudsi and released as open source under the
MIT license, Copyright Mahmoud Al-Qudsi (c) 2020-2023.
